### Topics not covered in this course

\- Desktop and [mobile app
development](Android_mobile_app_development "wikilink") - [Web site
development](:Category:_Web_Development "wikilink") - [Game
design](Interactive_programming_with_Processing "wikilink") - [Computer
music and digital audio](Digital_Audio "wikilink") -
[Databases](:Category:Database_Design "wikilink") - [Interactive product
design](:Category:Physical_Computing "wikilink")

## Getting help

### FAQ

Students are expected to consult the [Student
FAQ](University_Student_Etiquette_Frequently_Asked_Questions "wikilink")
prior to asking questions of the tutors, professor, or other students.
This allows us to focus our time on questions of greater significance.

### Slack

Our course uses Slack as its main communication channel for
announcements and discussion. This is a good place to ask questions that
anyone - other students, graders, tutors, or the professor - can answer.

You are not required to supply any personally-identifiable information
when signing up for slack. Discuss with the professor if you have
concerns or questions about privacy.

\-
<https://join.slack.com/t/pythonsummer2020/shared_invite/zt-ekorftkl-iItAtlyGGxh2RqSC8obJnw>

### Tutoring

Tutors for this course are waiting to answer your every question via
Zoom videoconferencing.

Tutoring hours:

\- Monday- 1:00 pm until 5:00 pm - Tuesday- 9:30 am until 11:00 am, 1:00
pm until 3:00 pm - Wednesday- 1:00 pm until 5:00 pm - Thursday- 9:30 am
until 11:00 am, 1:00 pm until 3:00 pm

### Additional tutoring resources

Academic support is also available through the [University Learning
Center](http://www.nyu.edu/ulc).

### Talk with the professor

1.  see me before class

```
<!-- -->
```

1.  raise your hand or simply speak up during class

```
<!-- -->
```

1.  see me after class

```
<!-- -->
```

1.  come to my [open office
    hours](Amos_Bloomberg#Contact_Info "wikilink")

## Books

Reserved copies are available for use in Bobst Library at the Reserves
Desk, two floors down from the main lobby

### Required

We do not teach directly from any textbook. If you do purchase a
textbook, this is the official textbook for this course:

Starting Out with Python (4th Edition)

\- by Tony Gaddis - Publisher: Addison-Wesley; 4 edition

### Optional

\- [How to Think Like a Computer Scientist: Learning with Python
3](http://openbookproject.net/thinkcs/python/english3e/) - [Automate The
Boring Stuff](https://automatetheboringstuff.com/) - [A Byte of Python -
Swaroop C H.](http://www.swaroopch.com/notes/Python) - [Companion
Website to accompany Starting Out with Python, Third Edition by Tony
Gaddis](http://wps.pearsoned.com/ecs_gaddis_sowpython_3/) -
[MyProgrammingLab Online Tutorial Site](http://www.myprogramminglab.com)

` ** If you wish to use this resource you may purchase it along with the "Starting out with Python" textbook from the NYU bookstore. You can also purchase access to this site directly by visiting www.myprogramminglab.com and registering as a "student" - just follow the prompts and make sure to purchase access for the "Starting out with Python" programming lab.`\
` ** if you purchase it and it asks you for a "Section Access Code", use the following: NEWYOR-9976-0`

## Software

In this course, we are learning how to program Python version 3.x.
Instructions for setting up the Python programming environment are
[here](Set_up_Python_on_your_computer "wikilink").

## Grading

Grades are weighted as follows:

\- Assignments: 20% - Quizzes: 20% - Exam \#1: 30% - Exam \#2: 30%

## Assignments

### Submitting

Create a private channel in [Slack](#Slack "wikilink") named
_assgn_ab1258_, where _ab1258_ is replaced with your own NYU Net ID.
Invite the graders to that channel (we\'ll tell you how to do this). You
will submit your assignments in this channel.

Submit assignments by posting a message to this private assignments
channel in Slack:

\- Include a message with your name and the name of the assignment -
Include a zip file containing any files that comprise your assignment -
Make sure you are following the assignment filename conventions
mentioned [below](#Assignment_filenames "wikilink").

### Late penalty

For every 24 hours that an assignment is late, we will apply a 10%
penalty on the grade, up to a maximum penalty of 30%. After 72 hours, we
will no longer accept the assignment.

### Extensions

\- You are automatically granted 2 late assignment extensions of up to 1
week late each, with the exception that all assignments must be
submitted before the final exam date. - When submitting an assignment
for which you would like to use one of these automatic extensions, you
must notify the grader that you are using the extension, otherwise your
assignment will be rejected. - Do not ask for any extensions from the
professor

### Assignment filenames

If you are not familiar with [naming
files](Basic_computer_concepts#File_names "wikilink") and creating [zip
files](Basic_computer_concepts#Compressed_files "wikilink"), [get
help](#Tutoring "wikilink").

To clarify how we require assignment files to be named in this course,
please peruse the following examples....

**Example 1:** If my name were _Foo Barstein_, and I were submitting
Assignment \#1, my python file should be named
_barstein_foo_assignment1.py_. This python file should be compressed
into a zip file named _barstein_foo_assignment1.zip_. This zip file
should be submitted with the message, _Barstein, Foo: Assignment \#1_.

**Example 2:** If my name were _Jennifer Fergusson_, and I were
submitting Assignment \#2 in two parts, my python files should be named
_fergusson_jennifer_assignment2_part1.py_ and
_fergusson_jennifer_assignment2_part2.py_. These python files should be
compressed into zip file named _fergusson_jennifer_assignment2.zip_.
This zip file should be submitted with the message, _Fergusson,
Jennifer: Assignment \#2_

**Other filename requirements:**

\- No capital letters - No spaces - No special characters except the
underscore \\\_ character.

This naming convention is standard among savvy computer users to avoid
various complications.

**We will not accept files that do not follow these rules.**
